# Step 1: Hello, Prodirect Manipulation World!

<br>
Welcome to the first lesson for Sketch-n-Sketch. In this lesson, you will:

* Learn the basics of the Sketch-n-Sketch programming language and interface,
* Work through a "hello, world" example, and
* Create your own simple designs.

Let's get started.
As you work through the tutorial, we recommend that you keep
[Sketch-n-Sketch v0.3][sns] open in a separate tab or window and try out all
the sample interactions as you read. We'll sometimes drop in a "**Practice**"
marker to provide a gentle reminder, and we'll use an "**Exercise**" marker when
you really should stop, drop, and roll over to your Sketch-n-Sketch tab to try
out something in-depth.

### Warm-up

To preview the basics, let's jump right in and start playing around.
The default example that is loaded, called \*Scratch\*, draws a single, maroon
rectangle. Notice that there is some code on the left (the "code pane") and
an SVG canvas on the right (the "canvas pane").

First, try clicking and dragging the box around in the canvas pane, and notice
how the program is updated to match your changes.
Next, hit the Edit Code button, change the string `'maroon'` in the code pane
to a different color, say `'lightblue'`, and then hit the Run Code button.
Now the canvas is "active" again, so you can click and drag the box around
once more.

From these very simple interactions, we see that there are two ways to
modify a program in Sketch-n-Sketch: by directly manipulating the canvas,
and by editing the source program in the code pane.
In the rest of this article, we will describe the basics of how to use
(a) the interface,
(b) the programming language, and
(c) the direct manipulation capabilities.


### The Interface

As you've noticed, Sketch-n-Sketch is a tool that runs completely in the web
browser. We have tested the tool in Chrome and Firefox in several
configurations, but we have less experience using it in IE and Edge.
If you run into any issues, please let us know and try using a different
browser in the meantime.

#### Overview of Buttons and Menus

We will briefly describe all of the components of the user interface up front
for reference, but don't worry too much about all of the details &mdash; you
will get plenty of practice throughout the tutorial. For now, the most important
thing to remember is what you already know: that a program can be modified
either programmatically (in the code pane) or using direct manipulation (in the
canvas pane). You may edit in only one of these two modes at a time. The canvas
pane has a faint orange border when it is active and a faint gray border when it
is inactive.

Between the code and canvas panes is a column of buttons, as well as a dropdown
menu that is used to load different examples and working documents into your
active editing environment. The Edit Code button turns into a Run Code button
when pressed; this button is the passageway for switching between the two
modes of interaction.

The Save and Save As buttons work similarly to how they work in desktop
applications, and allow you to save your work to be resumed during a different
session. The Reload button reloads your active document to the last save that
was made. The Undo and Redo buttons allow you to rewind your history of edits,
including those changes made both via programmatic and direct manipulation.
Finally, the [Zones] button allows you to switch between different direct
manipulation modes (more on that shortly).

Below the canvas is an [Out] button that allows you to toggle between viewing
the output of your program as a visual canvas (the default) or as a "raw" SVG
definition. The latter allows you to copy-and-paste the raw SVG and export your
design to, for example, a local `.svg` file on your machine or into a
conventional SVG editor, such as [`svg-edit`][svgedit].

#### Saving Files Locally

There are two kinds of examples listed in the dropdown menu: "Built-In" examples
that are are provided with Sketch-n-Sketch, and "Local Saves" which are
user-created files that persist across browser sessions. Sketch-n-Sketch does
not currently provide support for working directly with the file system, so you
will not be able to view your work outside of Sketch-n-Sketch. When you first
launch Sketch-n-Sketch, there are no local saves to display in the dropdown
menu. Once you create your own local saves, they will appear in a labeled
section at the top of the dropdown list.

Loading and saving examples should be pretty straightforward. The Save As button
creates a copy of the current example, the Save button saves changes to the
current (locally saved) example, and Reload discards any outstanding changes
since the last saved version, without issuing a confirmation prompt.
(**Practice 1.1:** Now is a
good time to try creating your first local example.)

To load a different example, simply click on the dropdown menu and select one.
When doing this, any outstanding, unsaved changes to the current example are
discarded (again, without warning in the current implementation). If you select
a built-in example, the program will be displayed in the code pane and its
output will be rendered to the canvas pane. If you select a local save, the
program will be displayed but *not* its output. After all, you may have saved a
document that was not complete and would not compile! So, just hit the Run Code
button when you are ready.

The last thing to know about the dropdown menu is that \*Scratch\* is a special
built-in example. Unlike for other built-in examples, Sketch-n-Sketch *will*
remember changes to it as you work, so you may switch away from it and then back
and not worry about your work disappearing. These changes do not, however,
persist across browser sessions. So, it really is just a temporary scratch
space for toying around. Usually, you will want to work with locally saved
files.

Okay, there's one more thing... we promise this time! If you would like to delete
all your locally saved examples, select \*Clear Local Saves\* from the bottom of
the dropdown menu. Be careful, there's no prompt to let you change your mind,
and when they're gone, they're gone for good!

#### Customizing the UI

The interface also allows for a degree of customization. The interface can be
toggled between a vertical and horizontal view by pressing the [Orientation]
button. Similarly, the [Code Box] buttons toggles between a "fancy" code pane
and a bare-bones version. In our current implementation, the fancy code editor
can sometimes get into a funky state, especially when working with large
programs. If you run into issues, try switching to the plain code editor.

The relative sizes of the code and canvas panes can be changed by clicking and
dragging the edges of the middle button section. Whenever you save, your
interface layout is also saved for that document and is automatically set when
you load that document. Go ahead and fiddle around with these options now.

#### Keyboard Shortcuts

There are keyboard shortcuts for most of the actions that we've described. They
are by no means necessary, but if you would like to use them, the tables below
explain them. In the rest of the tutorial, we'll usually refer to the intended
actions that are associated with the buttons and keyboard shortcuts.

| Keypresses   |   Active Pane  | Meaning                                     |
|:-------------|:---------------|:-----------------------------|
| `e`          |   Canvas       | Enter Edit Mode   						   |
| `z`          |   Canvas       | Undo 									   |
| `y`          |   Canvas       | Redo                                        |
| `g` or `h`   |   Canvas       | Toggle Zones                                |
| `o`          |   Canvas       | Toggle Output Type                          |
| `s`          |   Canvas       | Save                                        |
| `a`          |   Canvas       | Save As                                     |
| `p`          |   Canvas       | Switch Orientation                          |
| Arrow Keys   |   Canvas       | Switch Orientation and Adjust Pane Size  |
| `Meta+Shift` |   Code         | Run Code   						   |

Here, `Meta` refers to `Alt` on Windows and `Command` on Mac OS X. The code box
provides its own keyboard shortcuts which depend on your particular browser
settings. If you want to use the keyboard shortcuts that come with the fancy code
editor, refer to [this page][aceshortcuts].

### Programming in Little

Programs in Sketch-n-Sketch are written in an untyped, little, programming
language we call Little. We have chosen to use a minimalist syntax in Little
that should feel familiar to anyone who has used a lisp-like language. If not,
don't worry! The syntax is very simple and will be introduced through a series
of examples. If you would like to see a more complete, technical summary of
Little, check out this [syntax reference][syntax].

The general structure of most Little programs is the
definition and calculation of everything you need for your graphic design, followed by
a final "main" expression that puts together an entire
[SVG image](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalable_Vector_Graphics).
The simplest such Little program is the following:

```
(svg [])
```

This program calls the `svg` function to draw a canvas with the given (empty)
list of shapes. **Practice 1.2:** Go ahead and enter Edit Mode while on the
\*Scratch\* example, delete the contents, and type in the code above. Then, run
the code.  Congratulations, you've just written your first Little program!

Most kinds of expressions in Little, such as the function call in the program
above, must be surrounded by parentheses. The parentheses must be included, and
extra ones are not permitted. For example, both `((svg []))` and `(svg ([]))`
are invalid Little expressions. Try these out to see how Sketch-n-Sketch
becomes very angry when you try to run invalid programs.

[^technicaloutput]: Technically speaking, the
[output](https://github.com/ravichugh/sketch-n-sketch/blob/master/src/Eval.elm#L48)
is of an [internal
type](https://github.com/ravichugh/sketch-n-sketch/blob/master/src/Lang.elm#L77)
called `Val` that is then
[rendered](https://github.com/ravichugh/sketch-n-sketch/blob/master/src/InterfaceView2.elm#L124)
to SVG, but it can be thought of as SVG, as it [mimics the structure of
SVG](https://github.com/ravichugh/sketch-n-sketch/blob/master/src/LangSvg.elm#L360)
and mostly just carries additional metadata.

A blank canvas is uninteresting, so let's add some shapes. There are several
built-in functions for making shapes. For example, the `rect` function can
be called as follows:

```
(rect color xpos ypos width height)
```

The `xpos` and `ypos` arguments specify the x-position and y-position of the
top left corner of the rectangle, respectively; `width` and `height` specify
the width and height of the rectangle, respectively; and `color` specifies the
color of the shape. The `color` argument can be specified using any color
string recognized by [CSS](http://www.w3schools.com/cssref/css_colorsfull.asp)
or as a list of four numbers representing RGBA values. (The next lesson will
also introduce a notion called "color numbers" in Sketch-n-Sketch.) The position,
width, and height values must be numbers. So, all of the following are different
ways of defining the same rectangle:

```
(rect 'Blue' 100 100 200 200)
(rect 'blue' 100.0 100.0 200.0 200.0)
(rect '#0000FF' (+ 50 50) 100 200 200)
(rect [0 0 255 1.0] 100 100.0 (/ 400 2) 200)
```

In fact, the following list expression is another way to represent the same
rectangle without calling the `rect` function; we will talk more about this
"internal" representation in a subsequent article:

```
[ 'rect' [['color' 'blue'] ['x' 100] ['y' 100] ['width' 200] ['height' 200]] [] ]
```

Enter Edit Mode, and place the rectangle into the empty `svg` definition that we
have from before:

```
(svg [(rect 'lightblue' 200 200 300 150)])
```

Now, run the program. There's your rectangle! Try experimenting with different
colors, positions, and sizes for your shape. Also try providing some invalid
arguments and see what happens. (Note: We try to handle most errors gracefully
and, in the worst case, detect when Sketch-n-Sketch crashes and relaunch the
tool in a similar state. However, there are still bugs, of course, but we hope
they don't get in the way of your exploration too much.)

#### Helper Definitions

Adding shapes one at a time is difficult and inefficient for any more than a
handful of shapes, especially if the shapes share attributes in common. To aid
in this, we can create our own names for structures that we intend to reuse.
This is done by defining variables using the built-in `def` and `let`
expressions. The syntax of these kinds of expressions is as follows:

```
(def pattern patternDefinition) remainderOfProgram

(let pattern patternDefinition remainderOfProgram)
```

They are very similar, and differ only in their intended use; `def` is meant for
"top-level" definitions that will be used for the remainder of the program
after it, and `let` is meant for more localized definitions within a `def`. This
distinction will become clear as you become more familiar with the tool. For
now, just remember that you cannot put a `def` inside of another `def`.

The `pattern` in the above definitions can either be a bare variable name or a
list of patterns, each of which can be a bare variable name or another list of
patterns. So, the following definitions all assign the values `10`, `20`, and
`30` to the names `x`, `y`, and `z`:

```
(def x 10)
(def y 20)
(def z 30)
```

```
(def [x y z] [10 20 30])
```

```
(def [[x y] z] [[10 20] 30])
```

These variables can also be defined using a sequence of nested
`let`-expressions, as follows:

```
(let x 10

(let y 20

(let z 30

  restOfProgram

)))
```

Notice how the parentheses "build up" at the end.
Yet another way of writing the same expression:

```
(let [x y z] [10 20 30]

  restOfProgram

)
```

Let's put these to use by giving a name to our rectangle, then using that
instead of the function when we put it in the call to the `svg` function. One
way we could do this is as follows. Note that single-line comments in Little are
specified using the semi-colon character.


```
; Top-level definitions
(def myRectangle (rect 'lightblue' 100 100 60 130))

; Main SVG expression
(svg [myRectangle])
```

Much better than before! Try using `let` instead of `def` and notice the
difference.[^defnote]

[^defnote]: To get a sense for why the `def` syntax was introduced, see the end
of
[this](https://github.com/ravichugh/sketch-n-sketch/blob/6e3874b0b44e121dba8423d3b41b832cd8bb6429/src/Prelude.elm#L106)
old version of Prelude, where there are a lot of functions in play.

#### Function Definitions

Let's now try defining several rectangles that look the same, evenly spaced in
the horizontal direction. One approach is the following:

```
; Top-level definitions
(def myRectangle0 (rect 'lightblue' 100 100 60 130))
(def myRectangle1 (rect 'lightblue' 250 100 60 130))
(def myRectangle2 (rect 'lightblue' 400 100 60 130))

; Main SVG expression
(svg [myRectangle0 myRectangle1 myRectangle2])
```

Although this does, in fact, draw three evenly-spaced rectangles, the
copy-and-pasted code makes it difficult to change the overall program. What if
we wanted to change a single property of the pattern, such as the color of the
boxes or the separation between them?

**Exercise 1.1:** To demonstrate the
problem, try changing the height of all three boxes, and then change their
positions so that they are spaced 274 pixels apart rather than 150.
After that, add a fourth, identical, evenly-spaced box.

As structured, our only option for such changes is to modify
multiple places in the program. Yuck! Much better would be to
refactor the program so that the common attributes are written once and to
define a function that computes the ones that differ.

The syntax for defining a function (also known as an "anonymous function"
or "lambda" if you're familiar with functional programming) is the following:

```
(\argumentPattern functionBody)
```

The backslash character is what indicates that this Little expression (which
requires parentheses, like most expressions) is a function definition. This
function expression takes a single argument variable or pattern. To define a
function that takes multiple arguments, write the following:

```
(\(argumentPattern1 argumentPattern2 ... argumentPatternN) functionBody)
```

The arguments are each defined in terms of patterns and multiple arguments are
contained in parentheses and separated by spaces. The names for these arguments
can then be used in the following expression. For example, a function that takes
in variables `x` and `y` then returns their sum would be as follows:

```
(\(x y) (+ x y))
```

Functions are often bound to a variable using a `def` (or `let`) so that they
can be referred to by names.

So, to define a function `placeRectangle` that places each rectangle at a given
x-position, we could write the following:

```
(def placeRectangle (\xpos
   (rect 'lightblue' xpos 100 60 130)))
```

Notice how `placeRectangle` takes an argument for the sole attribute,
namely, the x-position, that is different among the three boxes above.
Now, we can finish the program by rewriting the "main" expression
from before to the following:

```
(svg [(placeRectangle 100)
      (placeRectangle 250)
      (placeRectangle 400)])
```

This version is much easier to modify because a lot of the boilerplate
code has been eliminated.

#### Mapping Over Lists

One more thing we can do to improve our program is to eliminate having to
explicilty call `placeRectangle` each time we want another box. Instead,
we can apply the `map` function, which takes the following form:

```
(map function list)
```

What `map` does is apply the `function` to each element in
the `list`, and returns the list consisting of the results.[^justlikefp] So, we
can define a name that represents many rectangles and then use that instead of
writing a whole bunch of names. We could do this in the following manner:

[^justlikefp]: Just like in functional programming languages like Elm and
Haskell, and similarly to the `map` method in JavaScript.

```
(def placeRectangle (\xpos (rect 'lightblue' xpos 100 60 130)))
(svg (map placeRectangle [100 250 400]))
```

This concise program describes three similar rectangles, and if, we want to
change any of the shared attributes of the rectangles, like their color, we only
need to change *one definition* as opposed to three. Note that there is no
longer the list brackets around the argument to `svg`, because the output of `map`
is already a list.

**Exercise 1.2:** Redo the tasks from Exercise 1.1, this time starting from the
program above with `placeRectangle` and `map`.

### Direct Manipulation

Although we hand-rolled the Little language specifically for Sketch-n-Sketch,
it's a pretty standard untyped, functional language extended with support for
SVG images. The major novel component of Sketch-n-Sketch is that the editor
allows you to directly manipulate the output generated by a program.

If you haven't already tried, go ahead and try clicking and dragging the boxes
of the output after running the code and observing what happens to the input
source program. To see all of the ways you can manipulate your shapes, toggle
the Zones option from Hidden to Basic. Even when hidden, the basic zones are
active and can be manipulated.

Each zone is tied to particular attributes of a shape. For
example, the "Interior" zone of a rectangle is tied to its x- and y-positions,
and the "Bottom Right Corner" zone is tied to its width and height. As you
directly manipulate a zone, Sketch-n-Sketch figures out what to modify in
your program to match your changes, all in real-time!

Try dragging the interior of one of the boxes. Notice how the appropriate
x-position in the program is changed when dragging the mouse to the right or
left. More interestingly, the y-position of *all* the boxes change when dragging
the mouse up or down. This is because our program was defined such that all
rectangles have the same y-position (for example, `100`, in the version written
above). So, in response to your change to one rectangle, Sketch-n-Sketch figures
out that the only option is to change that constant, which (after re-running the
program) changes all the rectangles. In this way, Sketch-n-Sketch modifies your
program without altering or "breaking" any of the high-level structure of the
program.

This kind of synchronization between a Little program and an updated SVG canvas
can become subtle as programs get more complicated. As a way to help you
understand what effects your direct manipulation will have, Sketch-n-Sketch uses
the following color schemes for syntax highlighting. Whenever you mouse over a zone, the constants that
will be changed by manipulating that zone are highlighted in <span
class="hoverYellow">yellow</span> in the source code. When actually manipulating
that zone, the constants that are being changed are highlighted in <span
class="hoverGreen">green</span>. Constants that went into the calculation of
that attribute but will not be changed by your manipulating them are highlighted
in <span class="hoverGray">gray</span> and constants for which changes could not
be deduced are highlighted in <span class="hoverRed">red</span> (more on the
meanings of these last two colors in later lessons).

**Exercise 1.3:** Different shapes come with different attributes that can be
manipulated. Redefine your `placeRectangle` function to place a circle instead,
and then examine the different zones that are available to you. As a reference
for what the `circle` function takes as arguments, take a look at
[Prelude][PreludeSource], a library of Little functions that you can use. The
comments above each function serve as documentation. If you would like to see
more examples of Little code, you can also dig in through these definitions
themselves. Note that you can also view this library in the "example" called
\*Prelude\* in the dropdown menu.

[^colornum]: This is not a standard represenation for colors, and is defined
[here](https://github.com/ravichugh/sketch-n-sketch/blob/master/src/Utils.elm#L207).
Further investigation into implementation details for how constants are
substituted should quickly reveal why we chose one number to represent color in
this case.

### Summary

Whew! You now should have a sense for how to specify your own shapes, names, and
functions in Little.

**Exercise 1.4:** To further exercise your knowledge, go ahead and perform the
following tasks before proceeding to the next lesson:

- Change your placement function to take in the y-value of the shape instead of
  the x-value. This should result in your shapes being placed in a vertical line
  instead of a horizontal one.
- Change your program to display more than one row of shapes using any means you
  see fit. 
- Change your placement function to take an x- and a y-position and use these to
  make a grid of shapes. Hint: The function can be mapped over a list of points,
  such as `[[100 100] [200 100] ... ]`. If you take this approach, then your
  mapping function should be defined with the form `(\[x y] ...)`
  &mdash; notice the square brackets instead of the parentheses we have seen
  before &mdash; which "extracts" the two values from each point in the list.

### Survey

Please take a moment to fill out our survey for this first lesson, thanks!

<iframe
   src="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1PXnseEs1X_h38WGpCRSZUrDxheg5KnzXXiDncrOi0Ko/viewform?embedded=true"
   width="750" height="1300" frameborder="0" marginheight="0" marginwidth="0">Loading...</iframe>
<br>

### Next Up: [Step 2](02.html)

<!-- TODO change the version if necessary -->
[sns]: http://ravichugh.github.io/sketch-n-sketch/releases/v0.3/
[svgedit]: http://svg-edit.googlecode.com/svn/branches/stable/editor/svg-editor.html
[aceshortcuts]: https://github.com/ajaxorg/ace/wiki/Default-Keyboard-Shortcuts
[syntax]: https://github.com/ravichugh/sketch-n-sketch/blob/master/README.md
[PreludeSource]: https://github.com/ravichugh/sketch-n-sketch/blob/master/examples/prelude.little

