# Step 3

What this third lesson will cover:
- UI Widgets for manipulation of indirect parameters that have no direct representation

That's a big and somewhat complicated topic, so we'll be spending the whole
section on it. Further, you'll get the chance to pursue a somewhat more involved
design than you have in the previous two lessons; both to reinforce what you've
already learned and out of necessity to employ UI Widgets.

## Motivating UI Widgets

<!-- Begin with color example instead of circular boxes example -->

As you begin to make more ambitious projects, you will discover that there are
some attributes that you simply cannot manipulate directly. Whether or not you
believe me, we're going to go through an example now where there is a parameter
of the design that cannot be manipulated directly.
The design that we are implementing is that of `n` squares placed along the
radius of an imaginary circle. We'll be making use of some of the built-in
trigonometry functions as well as a new list-generating function `range`.

As you may remember from trigonometry class (or pre-calculus, depending on how
recently you were in high school), we can specify a circle in two dimensions
in terms of an angle `theta` as follows. Remember that `theta` starts at zero on
the x-axis and increases counter clockwise, returning to the start when it
equals two times pi.

```
x = radius * cos(theta)
y = radius * sin(theta)
```

So, to place shapes along the radius of a circle in `little`, we need to define
a radius parameter in addition to having some way to generate the appropriate
`theta` for each shape. Defining a radius is easy, and can be done using a
top-level `def` like we've done before along with the other typical variables
like initial x-position, y-position, and square edge length. 
One approach to placing each shape is to
follow the `map placementfunction index` paradigm that we've been using, and to
define each shape in terms of its index. In that vein, we can start with:

```
(def placeSquare (\i
  (let theta (... Calculation will go here ...)
  (square 'lightblue' (+ x0 (* radius (cos theta))) 
                      (- y0 (* radius (sin theta)))
                      sidelen) ) ) )
```

Notice here that we've used `let` to define a variable `theta` that only has
scope within the function definition. This means that the name `theta` can only
be used in this definition and so we can reuse the name later if we would like.
Further, this is the first time that we've used the trigonometric functions
`sin` and `cos`. They are invoked just like any other function and only take one
argument that should be expressed in radians. Finally, notice that the y-value
calculation for the square uses a `-` instead of a `+` like the x-value
calculation. This is because the coordinate system for SVG graphics and our
canvas is such that the y-position increases towards the down direction of the
screen (which you may have noticed if you payed close attention as you
manipulated our previous examples). Go ahead and start a new document in the
editor and enter what we have established so far, including the top-level
variable definitions mentioned earlier.

Now, all that remains is to figure out how to calculate `theta`. Since there are
two times pi radians total in a circle, the `i`th box out of `n` boxes  should 
be placed at `i * ((2 * pi) / n)` radians to be spaced evenly. However, this
means that we need to know how many total boxes there are going to be placed,
and somehow make sure that we have generated the appropriate indices to go into
our `placeSquare` function. This can be accomplished by adding another name to
our top-level definition, `totalNumber`, and using the built-in function
`range`. `totalNumber` will represent the total number of boxes we would like to
place, and `range` will generate a list from its first argument to its second 
argument in integer increments. So, we could get our list of indices in the
following way:

```
(def [... totalNumber] [... 7])
(def boxIndices (range 1 totalNumber))
```

Then, inside of our definition of `placeSquare`, we can calculate `theta` as we
described before. Note that `pi` is a built-in function that takes no arguments
to aid in these sorts of trigonometric calculations.

```
(def placeSquare (\i
  (let theta (* i (/ (* 2 (pi)) totalNumber))
  (square 'lightblue' (+ x0 (* radius (cos theta))) 
                      (- y0 (* radius (sin theta)))
                      sidelen) ) ) )
```

Go ahead and enter this into your example and then define a list of all the
squares by mapping this function over `boxIndices`. Then, put these boxes into
an `svg` definition and run the program.

After generating the output, try manipulating the boxes. You will find that
changing the overall radius and sidelength of the boxes is natural, but even
though some of the interior zones of the boxes are such that hovering over them
highlights the `totalNumber` variable to be changed, it is highlighted in red if
you attempt to change it. In this case, Sketch-n-Sketch is able to determine
that the `totalNumber` variable goes into the calculation of the position
becuase of its role in determining `theta`, but it is unable to infer any
program updates as a result of direct manipulation.[^itspossible]

[^itspossible]: Actually, it is possible to define `placeSquare` in such a way
as to make the `theta` 'increment' for each square in terms of the position of
the first box and then, from that, deduce the overall number of squares to place
using this increment. If done in this fashion, direct manipulation of the
position of this first square will change the number of squares. However, this
is (at least for me) a rather convoluted way to go about doing this, and makes
the manipulation of the `radius`, `x0`, and `y0` parameters drastically less
intuitive. However, if you would like to try it this way to see what I mean, go
ahead. Having warned you, this tutorial's conscience is clean.

Even though we cannot directly manipulate the total number of boxes with the 
program as is, it would still be very nice if there was a way to change the
total number of boxes without having do adjust a number by hand in the source
code. To accomplish this, we can define a 'helper object' that has our indirect
parameter (for the rest of the program) as a direct parameter for one of its
attributes. In this way, we can then directly manipulate this parameter without
having to touch the original source program ourselves. We call these 'UI
Widgets'.

Now, enough description, let's implement one of these widgets by defining a
square as such:

```
(def helperShape (square 'lightgreen' 
                    (+ some_x_location (* 50! totalNumber)) 
                    some_y_location
                    50!))
```

The y-position should be hard-coded (or otherwise made unmanipulable) to place
it outside your example's circle of squares and the color and side length are 
just hard-coded for convenience's sake. `some_x_location` should also be set to
a convenient value. The x-position calculation is directly
determined by `totalNumber` and as such changes to it can be deduced by
Sketch-n-Sketch when the x-position is manipulated. Go ahead and add this
definition to your document and add the shape into your `svg` declaration. Run
the program and you should see this square appear in addition to your circle of
squares. If your circle of squares interferes with your ability to manipulate
this new box, go ahead and change the constants around until they are
sufficiently separate. Now, drag this box back and forth. Cool, right?

You're now directly manipulating what was previously an indirect parameter, and
all using functions you already know! Since defining a helper shape is a very
common pattern, we've definied a few nice-looking sliders that can be used
instead of defining your own helper objects. For example, there is the `hSlider`
function that has arguments as follows:

```
(hSlider roundInt xStart xEnd y minVal maxVal caption curVal)
```

This returns two items in a list; the first element is the value that is is
manipulating and the second is the *list* of SVG elements that make up the
slider. <!-- Talk about arguments --> Usually this is paired with a `def` or `let` statement in the following
way:

```
(def [val slider] (hSlider false 100! 500! 300! 0 100 "Val: " 20))
... using val and slider
```


P1
- There's some things you just can't manipulate directly. Whether or not you believe me, we're going to go through an example of that now.
- Develop an example where we place squares in a circle. Along the way introduce trig functions and `range`.
- Now, even though the number of boxes that are placed equally spaced along the circle is a parameter of the image, there's no way to directly manipulate it. (Well, there is, but there's no *nice* way to do it).

P2
- In such a situation, it would still be really nice to be able to directly manipulate the number of squares. Enter UI Widgets.
- The principle behind UI Widgets is that you define a helper object that you don't intend to be in the final output that has a directly manipulable property that is linked to the indirect parameter that we can't otherwise manipulate.
- To illustrate the point, add one more box to your image that is defined in the following way:
  * `(square color(!) (+ new_x_0 (* 100! numboxes)) new_y_0(!) new_side_length(!))`
- Manipulating the x position of this box will change the `numboxes` parameter. So, you can now directly manipulate the number of boxes, an indirect parameter.

P3
- We can do better than just bare boxes; look at hSlider, vertical sliders, and xySliders
- Go over how to drop these into your program, and how to structure them to manipulate particular parameters

P4(?)
- Explain how `line` works(?)
- Explain how `concat` works(?)
- Could use the Ferris Wheel example to do this.

## Free Form Example, Complex enough to warrant UI Widgets, Reinforces what we've already learned

P1
- Your turn again!
- Time to design something a bit bigger. Do the following things (in order would probably be easiest):
  * Choose an overall design that you would like to create. It should involve at least three kinds of shapes.
  * Choose a subset of the design that is all of one shape and where the elements are logically linked to one another (e.g. the cars in the Ferris Wheel example). Write a placement function and map it over a list of indices (or a list of some parameter) to generate that subset.
  * If possible, reduce that list of indices or parameters to something that is determined according to only one or two variables. `range` comes in handy here, and mapping a `generateParameter` function over something generated by range is also good.
  * Now, make a UI Widget to manipulate this parameter or these parameters.
  * Pick the next subset of the design, and repeat.
  * Go until you've completed the design. Feel free to 'turn off' the UI Widgets that you don't want anymore as well as freeze parameters that you feel good about.
- Suggested projects: 
  * A much more full-featured color picker (RGBA, brightness, etc.)
  * A city or country flag that has many repeated elements
  * A simple picture of a house, like [this](http://www.sbccaofmn.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/house-clipart.gif).
