# Step 3: Indirect Manipulation using UI Widgets

<br> This third lesson will cover:

- Ways to directly manipulate attributes that have no obvious direct
  representation.

This is a major and somewhat complicated topic, so we will spend the whole
section on it. In addition, you'll get the chance to pursue a somewhat more
involved design than you have in the previous two lessons; both to reinforce
what you've already learned and to take advantage of this new design pattern.

<!-- what you've already learned and out of necessity to employ UI Widgets. -->

### Motivating UI Widgets

<!-- Begin with color example instead of circular boxes example -->

The results of direct manipulation changes in Sketch-n-Sketch so far have
brought "traditional" user interface behavior to a setting where the output is
generated by programs written in a high-level language. For example, dragging a
rectangle affects its x- and y-positions; stretching the border of a circle
affects its radius attribute; and so on.

As you begin to tackle more ambitious projects, however, you will discover that
there are some attributes that you simply cannot manipulate directly. One
example is the color of a shape. Many direct manipulation tools, such as
Illustrator and PowerPoint, offer tools like sliders to control properties such
as these, which have no obvious direct representation. Instead, sliders and
other *user interface widgets* provide "indirect" manipulation over such
attributes.

#### Color Numbers

Sketch-n-Sketch provides some basic support for user interface widgets like
color sliders. As described in the first lesson, there are multiple ways to
define the color of a shape in Little (as a valid CSS color string, and as a
four-element list of numbers that specifies an RGBA value).

Alternatively, the color attribute may be defined using what we call a *color
number*, which is an integer in the range [`0`, `500`). This notion, though non-
standard, has a simple meaning: the numbers `0` to `360` cover a wide range of
colors across the entire spectrum, and `361` to `499` cover a grayscale
spectrum. These 500 numbers constitute a large enough variety of colors for most
of our purposes. More importantly, the Sketch-n-Sketch editor provides special
support when color attributes are defined using these color numbers.

**Practice 3.1:** To see how this works, first write a simple program that draws
a single shape as you have learned so far. Try redefining your program to use a
color number, and then run it. Next, toggle the Zones to display Color zones,
rather than the Basic ones that we have been using so far. You'll notice that
the shape is now equipped with a slider that can be used to change the color
number value. That is, this slider indirectly manipulates the color of the
particular shape. And better yet, as you have become accustomed to throughout
this tutorial, this indirect manipulation is tied directly to the Little
program, where the color number attribute is updated in real-time as you
manipulate the slider. Not bad!

**Exercise 3.1:** Return to your rectangles example from our previous lesson,
and modify the program to use a color number instead. Toggle the Zones to Color,
and try manipulating one of the sliders. You'll notice that each rectangle gets
its own color slider, which can clutter the canvas and which is also unnecessary
since all your rectangles share the same color number. Not to worry, because
Sketch-n-Sketch provides a way to hide some unnecessary zones like these. The
function call

<div class="codePlusFormatting"> (basicZonesTail *shapes*) </div>

is a cue that only the first shape in the list *shapes* (the "head" of the
list) should be given a color slider zone and that the rest of the shapes in the
list (the "tail" of the list) should only have the Basic zones. Besides this,
the call to `basicZonesTail` has no effect on the actual output canvas of the
program. Try adding a call to `basicZonesTail` in front of the `(map
placeRectangle [0 1 2])` expression in your program. This constitutes a small
way to customize the user interface in Sketch-n-Sketch, a theme that will crop
up again and again in this lesson.

<!-- The simplest example of this is color. Because of this, we have built in a
zone to enable manipulation of the color. Go ahead and change to the three boxes
example or your `n` shapes example from last lesson. Then, cycle through the
Zone types until the Color option is displayed. Next to each shape, you should
see a slider that allows you to cycle through a subset of the allowed RGB values
as well as a grayscale. When you do this, you may notice that the color field of
the shape that you are interacting with changed from what it was before to a
number between `0` and `500`. This is a non-standard representation of color
that we call a Color Number and is a product of the underlying mechanics of how
we perform the program updates. The intended use is for this widget to allow
quick sampling of different colors while the final palette will be specified
with the more full-fledged RGBA or CSS string specification, which includes Hex.
-->

<!-- #### Other Indirect Attributes -->

### Example: Arranging Boxes in a Circle

No matter how awesome an editer may be, not all attributes can be built-in to be
directly manipulatable. Beyond color, there are many other attributes in larger
projects that are prime candidates for indirect manipulation. We will now work
through an example where there is a parameter of the design that cannot be
manipulated directly. Then, we're going to demonstrate how, without any
additional built-in support from Sketch-n-Sketch, we can easily write our own
tools to manipulate them anyway.

Our goal will be to implement a design with `n` squares evenly spaced along an
imaginary circle of a given `radius`. Along the way, we'll learn about some more
functions that come pre-loaded with Sketch-n-Sketch. Let's start by defining a
circle, using variables to make it easy to refer to them later:

``` 
(def [xCircle yCircle radius] [100 100 130]) 
(def theCircle (circle 400 xCircle yCircle radius))
```

<!-- We'll make use of some of the built-in trigonometry functions as well as a
list-generating function `range`. -->

As you may remember from trigonometry class (or pre-calculus, depending on how
recently you were in high school), a point *(x,y)* along a circle of a given
`radius` can be computed as *(cos &theta;, sin &theta;)* in terms of an angle
*&theta;*. Remember that *&theta;* starts at zero on the x-axis and increases in
the counterclockwise direction, returning to the start when *&theta;* equals two
times *&pi;*. We'll use these equations to help compute the positions of `n`
boxes along the edge of `theCircle`, using the trusty

<!-- Using the syntax of Little and its built-in trigonometric functions, the
corresponding point may be defined as follows:

``` (let x (* radius (cos theta)) (let y (* radius (sin theta))   ... )) ``` -->

<div class="codePlusFormatting"> (map *drawingFunction* *indices*) </div>

pattern we have seen several times throughout the tutorial. In particular, we
can start with:

<!-- So, to place shapes along the radius of a circle in `little`, we need to
define a radius parameter in addition to having some way to generate the
appropriate `theta` for each shape. Defining a radius is easy, and can be done
using a top-level `def` like we've done before along with the other typical
variables like initial x-position, y-position, and square edge length.  One
approach to placing each shape is to follow the `map placementfunction index`
paradigm that we've been using, and to define each shape in terms of its index.
In that vein, we can start with: -->

``` 
(def [n boxLen] [7 40]) (def boxIndices ( ... someListHere ... ))

(def placeSquare (\i
  (let theta ( ... someCalculationGoesHere ... )
  (square 200
    (+ xCircle (* radius (cos theta)))
    (- yCircle (* radius (sin theta)))
    boxLen))))

(def theBoxes map placeSquare boxIndices))

; The Main Canvas (svg (append [theCircle] theBoxes)) 
```

Notice here that we've used `let` to define a variable `theta` that only has
scope within the function definition. This means that the name `theta` can only
be used in this definition and so we can reuse the name later if we would like.
Furthermore, this is the first time that we've used the trigonometric functions
`sin` and `cos`. They are invoked just like any other function and only take one
argument that should be expressed in radians. Finally, notice that the y-value
calculation for the square uses a `-` instead of a `+` like the x-value
calculation. This is because the coordinate system for SVG graphics and our
canvas is such that the y-position increases towards the down direction of the
screen (which you may have noticed if you payed close attention as you
manipulated our previous examples).

**Practice 3.2:** To get things rolling, create a new file in the editor and
enter what we have established so far, including the top-level definitions
mentioned earlier. Fill in the missing expressions with some reasonable dummy
values to start, just so that we can start to visualize parts of our output
canvas.

Now, we have to figure out we should actually define `theta` and `boxIndices`.
Since there are *2&pi;* radians in a circle, the `i`th box out of `n` boxes
should be placed at `(* i (/ (* 2! (pi)) n)` radians to be spaced evenly. Notice
that *&pi;* is written as `(pi)` in Little. You can think of it as a built-in
function that is called with zero arguments (which explains the parentheses). We
freeze the number `2` because it is not something that should ever change. Let's
drop this calculation of `theta` into our template from above:

``` 
(def placeSquare (\i
  (let theta (* i (/ (* 2! (pi)) n)) 
  (square 200
    (+ xCircle (* radius (cos theta)))
    (- yCircle (* radius (sin theta)))
    boxLen))))
```

The last thing we need to do is define a list of indices from `1` to `n`.
Sketch-n-Sketch provides a function called `range` that computes precisely what
we need (take a peek at the [Prelude source code][PreludeSource] if you want to
see how to write this (recursive) function in Little):

``` 
(def boxIndices (range 1 n)) 
```

<!-- However, this means that we need to know how many total boxes there are
going to be placed, and somehow make sure that we have generated the appropriate
indices to go into our `placeSquare` function. This can be accomplished by
adding another name to our top-level definition, `totalNumber`, and using the
built-in function `range`. `totalNumber` will represent the total number of
boxes we would like to place, and `range` will generate a list from its first
argument to its second argument in integer increments. So, we could get our list
of indices in the following way:

``` (def [... totalNumber] [... 7]) (def boxIndices (range 1 totalNumber)) ```

Then, inside of our definition of `placeSquare`, we can calculate `theta` as we
described before. Note that `pi` is a built-in function that takes no arguments
to aid in these sorts of trigonometric calculations.

Go ahead and enter this into your example and then define a list of all the
squares by mapping this function over `boxIndices`. Then, put these boxes into
an `svg` definition and run the program. -->

Make these changes and re-run the program.

**Exercise 3.2:** You'll notice that position of the squares isn't quite right: the
top-left corners, rather than their centers, fall on the edge of the circle.
Modify the computed x- and y-positions inside `placeSquare` so that the boxes
are centered along the circle's edge.

#### Directly Manipulating the Number of Boxes

If you've started to directly manipulate the shapes, you will find that changing
the overall `radius` of the circle and `boxLen` of the boxes is pretty natural.
But changing the number `n` of boxes is not so easy. Even though some of the
interior zones of the boxes are such that hovering over them highlights the `n`
variable to be changed, it becomes highlighted in red if you attempt to change
it. In this case, Sketch-n-Sketch is able to determine that the `n` variable
goes into the calculation of the position becuase of its role in determining
`theta`, but it is unable to infer any program updates as a result of direct
manipulation.[^itspossible]

[^itspossible]: Actually, it is possible to define `placeSquare` in such a way
as to make the `theta` "increment" for each square in terms of the position of
the first box and then, from that, deduce the overall number of squares to place
using this increment. If done in this fashion, direct manipulation of the
position of this first square will change the number of squares. However, this
is likely to be a rather convoluted way to set up the program and, worse, will
make manipulating `radius`, `xCircle`, and `yCircle` parameters drastically less
intuitive. However, if you are curious, you may enjoy trying this out anyway.

<!-- way to see what I mean, go ahead. Having warned you, this tutorial's
conscience is clean.

Even though we cannot directly manipulate the total number of boxes with the
program as is, -->

**Practice 3.3:** It would be really nice if there was a way to change the total
number of boxes without having do adjust a number by hand in the source code.
Fortunately, we can accomplish this by defining a "helper object" where one of
its attributes is defined to be the "indirect" parameter `n` used by the rest of
the program. In this way, we can then directly manipulate this parameter without
having to touch the original source program ourselves.


Behold the following helper object:

``` 
(def helperObject
  (let xHelper (+ 10! (* 50! n))
  (square 'lightgreen' xHelper 10! 50!)))

(svg (append [theCircle helperObject] theBoxes)) 
```

The key is the x-position of, namely, the `xHelper` expression, which is
computed using `n`. Since all other constants that go into this expression are
frozen, Sketch-n-Sketch will definitely manipulate `n` when dragging the box
horizontally. We choose to freeze y-position of `helperObject`, so that it will
only slide horizontally, not vertically. Try dragging this box back and forth.
You're now directly manipulating what was previously an indirect parameter, and
all using functions you already know! Cool, right?

<!--  is frozen, so that it slide should be hard-coded (or otherwise made
unmanipulable) to place it outside your example's circle of squares and the
color and side length are  just hard-coded for convenience's sake.
`some_x_location` should also be set to a convenient value. The x-position
calculation is directly determined by `totalNumber` and as such changes to it
can be deduced by Sketch-n-Sketch when the x-position is manipulated. Go ahead
and add this definition to your document and add the shape into your `svg`
declaration. Run the program and you should see this square appear in addition
to your circle of squares. If your circle of squares interferes with your
ability to manipulate this new box, go ahead and change the constants around
until they are sufficiently separate. Now, drag this box back and forth. Cool,
right? -->

#### Little Sliders

Since defining helper shapes, what we call *user interface widgets*, is very
common, we've defined a few nice-looking sliders that can be used instead of
having to build your own helper objects. For example, there is the `hSlider` function
that has arguments as follows:

<div class="codePlusFormatting"> (hSlider *roundInt* *xStart* *xEnd* *y*
*minVal* *maxVal* *caption* *curVal*) </div>

This returns two items in a list; the first element is the value that is being
manipulating and the second is the *list* of SVG elements that make up the
slider. The argument *`roundInt`* is a boolean (`true` or `false`) that
indicates whether or not the variable that it modifies should be rounded to the
nearest integer. The *`xStart`* and *`xEnd`* parameters indicate the x-positions
on the canvas that the slider should start and stop at, while *`y`* indicates
the y-position. The *`minVal`* and *`maxVal`* are the minimum and maximum
respective values that the slider covers for the variable that it specifies, and
*`caption`* provides a label. Finally, *`curVal`* represents the current value
of the variable that it determines, and it is set when first creating the slider
to indicate the initial value.

Usually, a call to `hSlider` is paired with a `def` or `let`, as in the
following example:

```
(def [varName varSlider] (hSlider false 100! 500! 300! 0 100 'varName: '20))
```

Then, `varName` can be used in your program like any other variable. Remember,
in order for the slider to appear it must be appended to the `svg` statement at
the end of your program. 

**Practice 3.4:** Let's go back to our earlier example of the boxes arranged in
a circle. To specify a slider that accomplishes the same thing as our
`helperObject`, we can replace it with the following. You should remove the
original definition of `n`, because now it is one of the return values from the
slider. And this new `def` should go near the top of the program, before you use
the `n` variable anywhere else.

``` 
(def [n nSlider] (hSlider true 30! 300! 30! 1! 7! 'Number of Boxes: ' 3))
```

Finally, you should update the main canvas as follows:

```
(svg (concat [[theCircle] theBoxes nSlider]))
```

Here, the library function `concat` is used to concatenate multiple lists into a
single list. Try this out.

It is important to note that the `hSlider` function is written in Little without
any "extra" support from Sketch-n-Sketch. This is in contrast to the built-in
color sliders for color numbers we have seen before. The main takeaway is that
the programmer has the power to customize the user interface beyond what comes
pre-packaged into the design. This is a powerful idea that we believe
demonstrates the potential benefits of Sketch-n-sketch's combined programmatic
and direct manipulation approach.

<!-- Go ahead and change your example to use a slider instead of a helper box,
run the program, and then adjust the number of boxes using it. -->

For more inspiration, we've provided other sample slider implementations in the
built-in examples Sliders, Buttons, Widgets, 2D Slider, and Color Picker. Coming
up with useful widgets and reusing them in later projects is a good idea, and
feel free to copy what we've done if it helps your workflow. Take a look at the
'Box Grid', 'Active Trans', and 'Ferris Wheel' examples to see how we have
put custom UI widgets to good use.

<!-- P1 - There's some things you just can't manipulate directly. Whether or not
you believe me, we're going to go through an example of that now. - Develop an
example where we place squares in a circle. Along the way introduce trig
functions and `range`. - Now, even though the number of boxes that are placed
equally spaced along the circle is a parameter of the image, there's no way to
directly manipulate it. (Well, there is, but there's no *nice* way to do it).

P2 - In such a situation, it would still be really nice to be able to directly
manipulate the number of squares. Enter UI Widgets. - The principle behind UI
Widgets is that you define a helper object that you don't intend to be in the
final output that has a directly manipulable property that is linked to the
indirect parameter that we can't otherwise manipulate. - To illustrate the
point, add one more box to your image that is defined in the following way:   *
`(square color(!) (+ new_x_0 (* 100! numboxes)) new_y_0(!) new_side_length(!))`
- Manipulating the x position of this box will change the `numboxes` parameter.
So, you can now directly manipulate the number of boxes, an indirect parameter.

P3 - We can do better than just bare boxes; look at hSlider, vertical sliders,
and xySliders - Go over how to drop these into your program, and how to
structure them to manipulate particular parameters

Do we really need this section? Line and concat should hopefully be pretty
straightforward, and the ferris wheel is a pretty big discussion to step through
for only explaining those two things. It's a really compelling example and use
case, but I'm not sure if the added complexity of going through a whole other
big example is worth what we might get from it in this portion. P4(?) - Explain
how `line` works(?) - Explain how `concat` works(?) - Could use the Ferris Wheel
example to do this. -->

<!-- ### Free Form Example, Complex enough to warrant UI Widgets, Reinforces
what we've already learned -->

### Mini-Project

Now that we've gone through a significant amount of material, it's time for you
to tackle a bigger project! Go ahead and do the following (in order would
probably be easiest):

**Exercise 3.3:** Choose a design that you would like to create. It should
involve at least three kinds of shapes and be complicated enough to be
interesting to you. You may find it helpful to sketch on paper at this point.

**Exercise 3.4:** Choose a subset of the design that is all one shape and such
that the elements are logically linked to one another. Write a placement
function and map it over a list of indices or a list of some parameter to
generate that subset of the image.

**Exercise 3.5:** If possile, reduce that list of indices or parameters to an
expression that is determined according to only one or two variables. `range` is
very handy for simplifying index lists and mapping a `generateParameter`
function over a list of indices generated by `range` is also a good way to
generate a list of logically linked parameters.

**Exercise 3.6:** Create or use an existing UI widget to manipulate this
parameter or parameters.

**Exercise 3.7:** Pick another subset of this design and repeat the above
process. Continue this until you've completed the design, feeling free to "turn
off" the UI widgets that you are not using anymore as well as freezing
parameters that you have set how you like.

To get the creative juices flowing, here are some suggested project ideas:

* A more full-featured color picker than the built-in color slider. Being able
to cover all of the RGBA values would be desirable. * A simple picture of a
house, like [this](http://www.sbccaofmn.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/house-
clipart.gif). * A minimalist art piece with repetitive elements. Feel free to
channel your inner
[Mondrian](https://www.google.com/search?q=mondrian+minimalist+art&tbm=isch).

###Survey

<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1o-7LHX08JOvUs0oiWUa6zWVROpt8oAXXgthpKm3EjbQ/viewform?embedded=true" width="760" height="1160" frameborder="0" marginheight="0" marginwidth="0">Loading...</iframe>

<!-- P1 - Your turn again! - Time to design something a bit bigger. Do the
following things (in order would probably be easiest):   * Choose an overall
design that you would like to create. It should involve at least three kinds of
shapes.   * Choose a subset of the design that is all of one shape and where the
elements are logically linked to one another (e.g. the cars in the Ferris Wheel
example). Write a placement function and map it over a list of indices (or a
list of some parameter) to generate that subset.   * If possible, reduce that
list of indices or parameters to something that is determined according to only
one or two variables. `range` comes in handy here, and mapping a
`generateParameter` function over something generated by range is also good.   *
Now, make a UI Widget to manipulate this parameter or these parameters.   * Pick
the next subset of the design, and repeat.   * Go until you've completed the
design. Feel free to 'turn off' the UI Widgets that you don't want anymore as
well as freeze parameters that you feel good about. - Suggested projects:    * A
much more full-featured color picker (RGBA, brightness, etc.)   * A city or
country flag that has many repeated elements   * A simple picture of a house,
like [this](http://www.sbccaofmn.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/house-
clipart.gif). -->

[PreludeSource]: https://github.com/ravichugh/sketch-n-sketch/blob/master/examples/prelude.little
