# Step 5: Additional SVG Functionality

<br> In the previous several lessons, we have discussed SVG features that have
some "special" support from Sketch-n-Sketch. In this lesson, we will cover:

- How to use Little's "thin wrapper" around the full range of SVG
  nodes and attributes.

Let's head for the finish line!

### Thin Wrapper Syntax

As mentioned in the first lesson, the output of a Little program is an SVG node
that has type `svg`. However, while SVG nodes are represented in text form as
XML-style nodes and attributes delimited with `<` and `>`, SVG nodes in Little
are represented by three-element lists of the following form:

```
[ 'nodeName' attributeList childNodeList ]
```

Furthermore, each attribute takes the form

```
[ 'attrName' value ]
```

where the `value` can be a string, number, or list depending on what `attrName`
is. No matter what, however, a string `value` can be used, in which case it is
copied directly into the output SVG format. For this reason, we
describe our representation of SVG elements as a "thin wrapper" around the full
specification, because you can always just use strings. (The benefit of using
numbers, lists, etc. whenever possible, however, is that Sketch-n-Sketch editor
can provide interactive direct manipulation when these values are not "buried"
inside strings.) The `nodeName` value above can also be any string and, thus,
provides access even to SVG elements that are not handled specially by the
editor.

Having let the cat out of the bag, we can now think about how to reimplement the
`rect` function ourselves. In raw SVG format, a rectangle is specified in the
following fashion:

```
<rect x="xval" y="yval" width="widthval" height="heightval" fill="colorname">
	<!-- Usually no children -->
</rect>
```

Usually, a rectangle has no children, so we may leave the children list empty.
Furthermore, the attributes that are absolutely necessary are `x`, `y`, `width`,
`height`, and `fill`. So, we should make those arguments to our function. Thus,
we can specify the following Little function to make a rectangle:

```
(def ourRect (\(x y w h fill)
  [ 'rect' 
    [ ['x' x]
      ['y' y]
      ['width' w]
      ['height' h]
      ['fill' fill]
    ]
    []
  ] ) )
```

It can be hard to read and write code with these lists of lists everywhere, so
sometimes it helps to introduce temporary variables (and to choose whitespace
to taste):

```
(def ourRect (\(x y w h fill)
  (let attrs [['x' x] ['y' y] ['width' w] ['height' h] ['fill' fill]]
  (let children []
    ['rect' attrs children]))))
```

That's pretty much all there is to the built-in `rect` function. All of the
shape functions in Little are implemented in similar fashion. Take a peek at
[Prelude][PreludeSource] to see how the functions `line`, `rect`, `circle`,
`path`, and so on simply provide a nicer syntax than having to write down lists
of lists all over the place.

The Prelude functions are defined to take as arguments the most common
attributes for each kind of shape. But because SVG elements are really
represented using the aforementioned three-element list encoding under the hood,
there's nothing stopping you from specifying additional attributes.
For example, as mentioned on the
[documentation page](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/SVG/Element/rect) for `rect`, another common usage is to specify a
rectangle with rounded corners.

**Exercise 5.1:** Modify `ourRect` so that it allows you to specify the radius of
the rounded corners.

**Hint:** There's a nice helper function in [Prelude][PreludeSource] called `addAttr`
that can be very helpful for creating complicated SVG nodes. Its definition
is as follows:

```
(def addAttr (\([shapeKind oldAttrs children] newAttr)
  [shapeKind (snoc newAttr oldAttrs) children]))
```

This allows attributes to be appended to existing SVG nodes with
ease.[^designchoice] It is easy to imagine a similar function that allows for
the appending of children as well. Furthermore, as attributes and children are just
lists with elements that are straightforward to pattern match on with `case`,
there's plenty of functionality for any function to modify any shape in any way.

To illustrate, let's write a function that sets the `'fill'`
attribute of an SVG node if it isn't there and changes it to the given value if
it is:

[^designchoice]: Currently, we've stuck with the design decision to have the
built-in functionality lend itself towards a single statement that creates the
SVG node for a given shape or other structure after which that node isn't
manipulated any further. There's no reason why things need to be done this way
and it's simply how we chose to go about things &mdash; a design method that
involves creating shapes and then adding attributes to them after the
fact is equally as legitimate and just doesn't have a nice group of functions
to go along with it in Prelude.

<!--
  (case attrs
    ([]                   [['fill' fill]])
    ([['fill' _] | rest]  [['fill' fill] | rest])
    ([a | rest]           [a | (setFill_ rest fill)]))))
-->


```
(defrec setFill_ (\(attrs fill)
  (case attrs
    ([]              [['fill' fill]])
    ([[a v] | rest]  (if (= a 'fill')
                       [[a fill] | rest]
                       [[a v] | (setFill_ rest fill)])))))

(def setFill (\([nodeName attrs children] fill)
  [nodeName (setFill_ attrs fill) children]))
```
 
Notice how we need to keep in mind that the attributes themselves are
two-element lists inside of lists. This leads to more than a few nested
brackets, but the syntax should become familiar after you use it once or twice.

**Practice 5.1:** Enter the `setFill` function into a file, and use it to set
the fill of one or more shapes. Then, modify the function to have it set a
different attribute.

### SVG ViewBox

In all of our examples so far, we have used absolute coordinates (in pixels)
when defining the sizes and positions of SVG shapes. Because Scalable Vector
Graphics are, well, scalable, this is often okay; most SVG editors
and viewers can resize these designs appropriately if needed. Sometimes,
however, an SVG image with absolute coordinates may not be resized
automatically, such as when embedding it into an HTML document.

The best way to guarantee that your image (and any surrounding border spacing)
will be scaled appropriately is to specify a `viewBox` attribute for the
top-level `svg` canvas node, which defines a local coordinate system for the
design. The general structure of using a `viewBox` is that the top-level SVG
node ends up as follows:

```
<svg width="totalWidth" height="totalHeight" viewBox="minX minY maxX maxY">
  ...
</svg>
```

This creates an internal coordinate system for your design
that goes from `minX` to `maxX` in the x-direction and `minY` to `maxY`
in the y-direction. (Often, `minX` and `maxY` are both set to `0`,
effectively making `maxX` the `width` of the coordinate system and `maxY` the
`height`.)
This is offset by `minX` and `minY`, effectively defining a
rectangle within the `totalWidth` and `totalHeight` of your working `svg`
definition that is actually shown when it is rendered. If the `totalWidth` and
`totalHeight` parameters are omitted from the `svg` definition, then the
`viewBox` implicitly defines the width and height of the image, and the `minX`
and `minY` parameters can only specify a subset of the image that reaches all
the way to width and height. [^learnmore]

[^learnmore]: If you would like to gain a deeper intuition for how the SVG
`viewBox` works, a helpful demo can be found
[here](http://sarasoueidan.com/demos/interactive-svg-coordinate-system/).

Alright, that was all a bit specific. In general, a good way to think about a
`viewBox`, at least when it comes to exporting your images, is to start by
defining your SVG using raw pixel values (as we've been doing in this and
previous lessons). Then, when you're ready to export, change your call to `svg`
to a call to `svgViewBox` with the overall width and height of your image and
then right away your image will scale itself to fit its container!

**Exercise 5.2:** To see this workflow in action, let's convert the
Sketch-n-Sketch logo design into one that scales to fit the canvas. Start by
selecting the Logo example and create a locally saved version of it. Then,
change the appropriate constants so that the logo fits snugly in the top-left
corner of the canvas. Next, switch the top-level canvas function call from `svg`
to `svgViewBox` and choose appropriate additional arguments for it; take a look
at [the Prelude source][PreludeSource] to see how the `svgViewBox` function
corresponds to the `'viewBox'` attribute discussed above. Lastly, notice how the
rendered output scales to fit the canvas no matter what its size is &mdash; play
with this either by resizing the canvas pane or by resizing the entire browser
window.

Another great example of this pattern is in the Bar Graph example, which uses a variable called
`doneEditing` that, if set to `true`, renders the document using a `viewBox` and
if set to `false` doesn't. Furthermore, it also doesn't render the helper slider
when `doneEditing` is set to `true`, making a convenient mechanism to switch
between a "working" mode and an "export" mode. In fact, if you're working with
any complicated graphic that uses UI widgets, this setup makes for a very good
workflow.

#### Sliding and Panning and Zooming, Oh My!

Next, we will put several bits of knowledge and experience to good use &mdash;
about `viewBox`, the thin wrapper syntax, and our custom UI widgets &mdash; to
allow us to easily pan and zoom around a larger, design within a fixed window.
In particular, we will set up:

* two variables for the "total" width and height of the window,
* a slider (via `hSlider` from Prelude) to control a "zoom" parameter relative
  to the total window size, and
* a two-dimensonal slider (via `xySlider` from a built-in example) to control
  "x-offset" and "y-offset" parameters.

A general skeleton for this pattern is the following:

```
; -------------------------------------------------------------------
; Currently, xySlider is not currently included in Prelude, so
; copy the definitions of xySlider_ and xySlider here.

(def xySlider_ ( ... ))

(def xySlider  ( ... ))

; -------------------------------------------------------------------
; Define the window size and pan/zoom sliders.

(def [totalWidth totalHeight] [800! 800!])
(def [zoom zoomSlider]
  (hSlider false 50! 200! 300! 0.1! 5! 'Zoom: ' 1))

(def [width height] [(* zoom totalWidth) (* zoom totalHeight)])
(def [[xOffset yOffset] panSlider]
   (xySlider true 50! 250! 50! 250! 0! totalWidth 0! totalHeight
             'X pan: ' 'Y pan: '
             50 50))

; -------------------------------------------------------------------
; The shapes for the design go in here.

(def shapes ( ... ))

; -------------------------------------------------------------------
; The sliders and the design, panned and zoomed as necessary, goes here.

(def viewBoxAttr
  (+ (+ (+ (+ (+ (+ (toString (/ xOffset zoom)) ' ')
                    (toString (/ yOffset zoom))) ' ')
                    (toString totalWidth)) ' ')
                    (toString totalHeight)))

(def scaledDesign
  (let attrs [['viewBox' viewBoxAttr]
              ['width' (toString width)]
              ['height' (toString height)]]
  ['svg' attrs shapes]))

(svg (concat [[scaledDesign] panSlider zoomSlider]))

```

**Practice 5.2:** Add some shapes to the `shapes` definition, making sure that
all shapes that you would like to be visible have their dimensions such that
they are within the `totalwidth` and `totalheight` coordinates. Then, use
the pan and zoom sliders to move around your design. Notice how moving the
ball in the `xySlider` to the lower right causes the image to move to the
upper left.

As it is, the pan slider is such that it is meant to allow you to move your
viewing "window", which may be larger or smaller than the graphic, around the
overall canvas space. The ball in the slider that you manipulate is meant to
represent the location of this window, while the box that it is within is
meant to represent the total canvas space that the graphic resides in. To
achieve this effect, the sliders manipulate the aforementioned `minX` and
`minY` parameters to the `viewBox` attribute to change the offset that the
contents of that `svg` tag begins with inside their *internal* coordinate
system. So, if the `totalwidth` and `totalheight` are each `800`, and the
`width` and `height` are `200`, an offset of `100` in the x-direction will
correspond starting at x-position `400` as defined in the coordinates where
the shapes are. As these values don't get scaled when the zoom level is
changed, this leads to some perhaps unintuitive behavior when zooming as all
the zooming appears to be done either into or out of the top-left corner of
the source image.

In general, scaling and panning with `viewBox` will likely take a bit of
fiddling with to get how you would like it - something you won't be able to
avoid when working with SVG in any environment until you get familiar with how
`viewBox` works (we're told it's possible). Before then, usually using the 
built-in `svgViewBox` function and some experimentation are sufficient to do 
the trick.

<!--
Talk about what the interaction is like

Talk about why it is that way - xOffset, yOffset

Reiterate why it is the width/height of the viewbox that gets adjusted and not the width/height of the image (the viewbox is, on screen, the size of whatever container it's in - the width and height you give it are what define the units, and so that's what should change. Resize the canvas window to see what I mean).

Maybe an exercise on changing the slider to be more intuititve? Like changing the ball to a little wireframe window that resizes itself? Hmm...

That should be it on the discussion for this section. 

**Exercise 5.3** As it is, the ball in the pan slider is meant to indicate the location of a `window` within the overall canvas, represented by the slider's box. As this might be a bit unintuitive, go ahead and change the definition of `xySlider_` to make the ball a rectangle that scales depend

TODO finish this example and discussion
-->

**Exercise 5.4 (Optional):** Replace the deeply-nested series of string
concatenations in `viewBoxAttr` with an expression that uses the
[Prelude][PreludeSource] functions `map` and `joinStrings`; the latter is like
`concat` but for "squishing together" strings instead of lists.

<!--

To allow panning and zooming of a fixed-size window, we need only incorporate a
slider that allows the manipulation of both the x-offset and y-offset for the
window. Starting with that goal in mind, we can use the xySlider in the built-in
examples to specify these offsets. As the upper left corner of the editing
window is the only section of the editing space that will definitely always be
in view, let's position the slider there. Then, once we've specified the slider,
we can use the values that it provides to control our currently fixed-size
viewBox.


**Practice 5.2:** We can specify the slider as follows (just as in the built-in
example):


```
; A two dimensional slider in a similar style to the other sliders
(def xySlider_
  (\(dropBall roundInt xStart xEnd yStart yEnd minx maxx miny maxy xcaption ycaption curx cury)
    (let [rCorner wEdge rBall] [4! 3! 10!]
    (let [xDiff yDiff xValDiff yValDiff] [(- xEnd xStart) (- yEnd yStart) (- maxx minx) (- maxy miny)]
    (let ballx (+ xStart (* xDiff (/ (- curx minx) xValDiff)))
    (let bally (+ yStart (* yDiff (/ (- cury miny) yValDiff)))
    (let ballx_ (clamp xStart xEnd ballx)
    (let bally_ (clamp yStart yEnd bally)
    (let rball_ (if dropBall (if (< maxx curx) 0 rBall) rBall)
    (let rball__ (if dropBall (if (< maxy cury) 0 rball_) rBall)
    (let xval
      (let xval_ (clamp minx maxx curx)
      (if roundInt (round xval_) xval_))
    (let yval
      (let yval_ (clamp miny maxy cury)
      (if roundInt (round yval_) yval_))
    (let shapes
      [ (line 'black' wEdge xStart yStart xEnd yStart)
        (line 'black' wEdge xStart yStart xStart yEnd)
        (line 'black' wEdge xStart yEnd xEnd yEnd)
        (line 'black' wEdge xEnd yStart xEnd yEnd)
        (circle 'black' xStart yStart rCorner)
        (circle 'black' xStart yEnd rCorner)
        (circle 'black' xEnd yStart rCorner)
        (circle 'black' xEnd yEnd rCorner)
        (circle 'black' ballx_ bally_ rball__)
        (text (- (+ xStart (/ xDiff 2)) 40) (+ yEnd 20) (+ xcaption (toString xval)))
        (text (+ xEnd 10) (+ yStart (/ yDiff 2)) (+ ycaption (toString yval))) ]
  [ [ xval yval ] shapes ] ))))))))))))

(def xySlider (xySlider_ false))
```

Then, we can specify the x-offset and the y-offset by defining an xyslider in
the following fashion:

```
(def [[xoffset yoffset] panslider]
   (xySlider true 50! 250! 50! 250! 0! totalwidth 0! totalheight
             'X pan: ' 'Y pan: ' 0 0))
```

Where `totalwidth` and `totalheight` are frozen variables that match whatever
the total width and height of the space you would like to be able to pan around.
Then, after specifying this pan slider, we can utilize it by redefining the
`svg` call at the bottom of any of the examples to the following:

```
['svg' [] (concat [
  [['svg' 
    [ ['viewBox' (+ (+ (+ (+ (+ (+ (toString xoffset) ' ')
                                   (toString yoffset)) ' ')
                                   (toString totalwidth)) ' ')
                                   (toString totalheight))
      ]
      ['width' (toString width)] ['height' (toString height)]
    ] 
    (previouscontents)
  ]]
  panslider ])
]
```

Despite the copious amount of string concatenation, this is a very
straightforward specification of a `viewBox` inside of an `svg` node of a given
width and height. Note that the `totalwidth` and `totalheight` are different
from the `viewBox` `width` and `height` and should be less than the width and
height of the `viewBox` to get a "zoomed-in" feel. Go ahead and do this to an
example of your choosing. For an example of what numbers work well, on Clique we
found that the following asssignments worked nicely:

```
totalwidth -> 800
totalheight -> 800
width -> 1600
height -> 1600
```

Playing with these, you should find that changing the value of width and height
will change the level of apparent 'zoom' that is shown. So, to add a zoom
mechanic all we need to do is add another slider that, for a fixed `totalwidth`
and `totalheight` (which is determined by your particular screen more than
anything else) scales the `width` and `height` parameters accordingly. We can
use a horizontal slider for this that defines a `scale` parameter and then
calculate the `width` and `height` from there in the following manner:

```
(def [totalwidth totalheight] [ ... ])
(def [scale zoomslider] (hSlider false 50! 200! 300! 0.1! 5! 'Zoom: ' 1))
(def [width height] [(* scale totalwidth) (* scale totalheight)])
```

Further, we need to redefine our 'viewBox' to have an offset that is also
adjusted by the scale, as otherwise our units will change as we change the zoom.
So, we change our `(toString xoffset)` `(toString yoffset) definitions to:

```
(toString (/ xoffset scale))
(toString (/ yoffset scale))
```

Thus, setting the zoom slider to `2` will make the `width` and `height` double
of the `totalwidth` and `totalheight`, which makes the image look twice as
zoomed in as it otherwise would. Go ahead and incorporate this slider into the
example that you were working with to see the result. Neat, right?

As you can see, working with `viewBox` can be a touch unintuitive and may take
some experimentation when incorporating it into designs. However, the capability
to incorporate UI Widgets to be able to easily manipulate these parameters
greatly helps the process of figuring out the correct relationship between all
of the parameters over entering the numbers by hand.

-->

<!-- Full code for Clique is as follows for Ravi's and Jacob's reference:

;
; A six node clique
;
; A two dimensional slider in a similar style to the other sliders
(def xySlider_
  (\(dropBall roundInt xStart xEnd yStart yEnd minx maxx miny maxy xcaption ycaption curx cury)
    (let [rCorner wEdge rBall] [4! 3! 10!]
    (let [xDiff yDiff xValDiff yValDiff] [(- xEnd xStart) (- yEnd yStart) (- maxx minx) (- maxy miny)]
    (let ballx (+ xStart (* xDiff (/ (- curx minx) xValDiff)))
    (let bally (+ yStart (* yDiff (/ (- cury miny) yValDiff)))
    (let ballx_ (clamp xStart xEnd ballx)
    (let bally_ (clamp yStart yEnd bally)
    (let rball_ (if dropBall (if (< maxx curx) 0 rBall) rBall)
    (let rball__ (if dropBall (if (< maxy cury) 0 rball_) rBall)
    (let xval
      (let xval_ (clamp minx maxx curx)
      (if roundInt (round xval_) xval_))
    (let yval
      (let yval_ (clamp miny maxy cury)
      (if roundInt (round yval_) yval_))
    (let shapes
      [ (line 'black' wEdge xStart yStart xEnd yStart)
        (line 'black' wEdge xStart yStart xStart yEnd)
        (line 'black' wEdge xStart yEnd xEnd yEnd)
        (line 'black' wEdge xEnd yStart xEnd yEnd)
        (circle 'black' xStart yStart rCorner)
        (circle 'black' xStart yEnd rCorner)
        (circle 'black' xEnd yStart rCorner)
        (circle 'black' xEnd yEnd rCorner)
        (circle 'black' ballx_ bally_ rball__)
        (text (- (+ xStart (/ xDiff 2)) 40) (+ yEnd 20) (+ xcaption (toString xval)))
        (text (+ xEnd 10) (+ yStart (/ yDiff 2)) (+ ycaption (toString yval))) ]
  [ [ xval yval ] shapes ] )))))))))))))
(def xySlider (xySlider_ false))
(def [totalwidth totalheight] [800! 800!])
(def [scale zoomslider] (hSlider false 50! 200! 300! 0.1! 5! 'Zoom: ' 1))
(def [width height] [(* scale totalwidth) (* scale totalheight)])
(def [ [xoffset yoffset] panslider] (xySlider true 50! 250! 50! 250! 0! totalwidth 0! totalheight 'X pan: ' 'Y pan: ' 50 50))
(let node (\[x y] (circle 'lightblue' x y 20))
(let edge (\[[x y] [i j]] (line 'lightgreen' 5 x y i j))
(letrec genpairs
   (\xs
     (case xs
       ([x y | xx] [[x y]|  (append (genpairs (cons x xx)) (genpairs (cons y xx)))])
       ([x] [])
       ([] [])))
(let pts [[200 50] [400 50] [100 223] [200 389] [400 391] [500 223]]
(let nodes (map node pts)
(let pairs (genpairs  pts)
(let edges (map edge pairs)
  ['svg'
    []
    (concat [
  [['svg'
    [ ['viewBox' (+ (+ (+ (+ (+ (+ (toString (/ xoffset scale)) ' ')
                                   (toString (/ yoffset scale))) ' ')
                                   (toString totalwidth)) ' ')
                                   (toString totalheight))
      ]
      ['width' (toString width)] ['height' (toString height)]
    ]
    (append edges nodes)
  ]]
  panslider
  zoomslider ])
]
)))))))

-->

### Adding a New SVG Feature

In the zoom-and-pan example, we used the thin wrapper syntax to add "new"
attributes to "existing" SVG nodes in Little. But there is nothing from stopping
us from using the underlying representation to access different SVG node types
altogether.  For the last topic of this tutorial, we will demonstrate how to
incorporate an SVG element that has currently has no special support from
Sketch-n-Sketch. Check out [this
reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG) for an overview of
all the features in the most recent SVG specification.

We will choose to implement the `animate` tag with some very simple attributes.
As with any additional element that you incorporate into Little, there will be
no built-in zones that allow you to directly manipulate its attributes. However,
as we covered in a previous lesson, UI widgets work often work well for
manipulating attributes that are not hard-wired in to the editor.

The `animate` tag, in a simple form, takes the following structure:

```
<nodeToAnimate itsAttributes>
  <animate  attributeName="attrName"
            from="attrMin" to="attrMax"
            values="from;to"
            dur="duration"
            repeatCount="indefinite or count"></animate>
</nodeToAnimate>
```

So, to animate any given node over time, we need to add a child `animate` node with
the desired values for each of the attributes above.
In our case, we can assume that the `attributeType` will always be XML, so we won't
make that an argument to the `animate` function below:

```
(def animate (\(attrName from to dur repeat)
  ['animate'
    [ ['attributeName' attrName]
      ['from' (toString from)]
      ['to' (toString to)]
      ['dur' (+ (toString dur) 's')]
      ['values' (+ (+ (toString from) ';') (toString to))]
      ['repeatCount' repeat]
    ]
    []
  ] ) )
```

As with the shape functions from Prelude, this function provides a nicer way of
packaging together an SVG node without writing lists everywhere. Even better,
when calling the `animate` function, we can provide numeric values and rely on
this function to perform the `toString` conversions that are needed.

Now, we can create a rectangle that moves in the x-direction:

```
(def coolRect 
  [ 'rect'
    [ ['x' 100]
      ['y' 100]
      ['fill' 'lightblue']
      ['width' 100]
      ['height' 100]
    ]
    [ (animate 'x' 100 200 5 'indefinite') ]
  ]
)

(svg [coolRect])
```

That's a cool rectangle!

It's then straightforward to turn `coolRect` into a function that
takes an argument for the y-position, so we can draw many animated
rectangles on the screen at once:

```
(def coolRect (\ypos
  [ 'rect'
    [ ['x' 100]
      ['y' ypos]
      ['fill' 'lightblue']
      ['width' 100]
      ['height' 100]
    ]
    [ (animate 'x' 100 200 5 'indefinite') ]
  ]
) )

(svg (map coolRect [100 210 320 430 540]))
```

Now, we can programmatically generate animated rectangles with just as much
flexibility as we can any other shape, with the ability to change the low-level
placement function definitions to boot. **Practice 5.3:** Try having some of the arguments to
`animate` also depend on `ypos` and see what happens (changing `dur` leads to
some fun results).

As you can see by toggling the Zones, the zones for these shapes
are not where you might expect them to be. Sketch-n-Sketch (currently) expects
shapes to remain in the same location, so it does not alter the positions of the
zones based on where they are in the animation. Furthermore, there are
(currently) no built-in tools to help with animations. So, if working on the edge of
what the built-in functionality allows, be ready for a little bit of strange
behavior here and there. That being said, our tool is expressive enough to allow
for any features of SVG to be expressed and still be able to take advantage of
the benefits of programmatically specifying the image. This is part of the
benefit of coupling a general-purpose programming language with the "raw" target
SVG language.

**Exercise 5.4:** Now it's your turn. 
Pick an SVG element or attribute that is not built-in to Sketch-n-Sketch, and
write up some Little functions for working with it.
Good candidates include the `g` element, a filter, or a
gradient. Don't forget to look at the [SVG
documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG) for inspiration
and implementation details.

### Survey

That's all the material we have for this introductory tutorial.

After you fill out the survey for this lesson, please don't forget the last
step: the [exit survey][exitsurvey].

<iframe
   src="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/167V_79ttVdj8v-J4cT8uFWklMswg68lJXU4eeuxqjkQ/viewform?embedded=true"
   width="750" height="1400" frameborder="0" marginheight="0" marginwidth="0">Loading...</iframe>
<br>

### Last Stop: [Exit Survey][exitsurvey]

<br>

[PreludeSource]: https://github.com/ravichugh/sketch-n-sketch/blob/master/examples/prelude.little
[exitsurvey]: exit.html
